JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Amid
continued scrutiny over Hillary
Clinton's e-mails...
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: I don't think it
posed a national security
problem. I think that it was a
mistake that she has
acknowledged
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... Clinton and
four other candidates are
getting ready for the first
Democratic debate. We will look
at what they're facing on
Politics Monday.
And Washington Post journalist
Jason Rezaian convicted in
Tehran. Will the verdict lead
to a harsh sentence
or a possible pardon?
Then: discipline in schools,
concerns over how young is too
young to be suspended.
And one pro basketball player
returns to his home, bringing
some hope to one of the poorest
countries in the world.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Why do
you come back to Congo?
BISMACK BIYOMBO, Toronto
Raptors: I love the people. I
love the potential of this
place.
And I think we have
a bright future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Political and
ethnic tensions in Turkey were
at the boiling point today
after deadly bombings in
Ankara over the weekend.
Jonathan Rugman of Independent
Television News reports on the
day's developments.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: It was the
biggest bomb attack Turkey has
witnessed, the single biggest
blow to its stability in
And even the death toll is
disputed, like so much else. The
pro-Kurdish opposition says
128 people were killed. The
government says at least 97.
Saturday's attack was upon this
peace demonstration by Kurdish
and leftist protesters.
Two explosions were followed by
police tear-gassing survivors,
which only fed the assumption
that
the state, or dark forces within
it, were behind the violence,
though Turkey's prime
minister said today the
so-called Islamic State was the
prime suspect.
MAN (through translator): It was
definitely a suicide bombing. We
have strong evidence
for that.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: I.S. has a
possible motive. By setting
Kurds against Turks, it may be
encouraging its twin enemies to
go to war with each other
instead.
At this funeral of one of the
Kurdish victims in Istanbul
today, the mourners chanted that
Turkey's president was the
murderer, all this under the
watchful gaze of riot police.
In the mainly Kurdish southeast,
you hear the same cry: "The
president's a murderer."
MAN (through translator): Why
are they carrying out these
massacres against
revolutionaries,
socialists and those that are in
favor of peace? Why can we never
have a politician
or a member of government
suffering from these attacks?
This clearly shows who carried
out
this massacre.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Just up the
road from that funeral, Turkish
troops are advancing after
airstrikes against the Kurdish
PKK. The government's up for
reelection in just three weeks'
time,
and by appearing strong, is not
letting this national security
crisis go to waste.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The violence in
Turkey has spiked since another
bombing in July that
killed 33 people. That sparked
renewed fighting between the
military and the Kurdish PKK
rebels.
In Afghanistan, fighting
intensified today as Taliban
forces attacked a new city. This
time, the battles centered
around Ghazni, southwest of
Kabul. Last month, the Taliban
captured and held Kunduz in the
north for three days. Also
today, NATO announced two
U.S. and two British soldiers
died in a helicopter crash
Sunday in Kabul.
Government troops in Western
Syria made fresh advances today
with the help of Russian air
support. The ground offensive
aims to regain a stronghold of
President Bashar Assad's.
It's a village that would give
them access to a main highway.
Meanwhile, Russian jets
again hit targets
across Central Syria.
But, as the air war intensified,
President Vladimir Putin claimed
Russia's role is strictly
limited.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
By no means do we want to get
involved in any inter-religious
conflicts in Syria. We have only
one goal, which is
to support the lawful
authorities and to create
conditions for political
settlement. This
is what we have based our
actions on from the very
beginning. And this is what we
are
guided by now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. military
answered Russia's air campaign
today by airdropping
ammunition and other supplies
to rebels in Northern Syria.
This was another day of
bloodshed and death in and
around Jerusalem, with a spate
of new
stabbings. Within a few hours,
two Israeli policemen and two
civilians were attacked
in separate incidents. Two
teenagers were shot dead by
police. Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu accused
Israeli Arab leaders of helping
incite the violence.
In economic news, computer giant
Dell is buying data storage
company EMC in the tech
industry's
largest takeover ever. The deal
is valued at about $67 billion.
It will help move Dell's
focus away from traditional
hardware, like personal
computers, to storage and
business
services.
Wall made a modest advance
today, as investors waited for
third-quarter profit reports.
The
Dow Jones industrial average
gained 47 points to close above
17130. The Nasdaq rose eight
points, and the S&P
500 added two.
And nine former American
prisoners of war have returned
to Japan, seven decades after
the end of World War II. The
veterans, all in their '90s now,
traveled with their families
today to Yokohama to honor
fellow servicemen who died in
captivity. More than 130,000
Allied
troops were held prisoner by the
Japanese during the war. Almost
a third of them perished.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what's next for Washington Post
reporter Jason Rezaian,
found guilty by an Iranian
court; Syrian refugees in Jordan
desperate to find their next
move,
some even going back to Syria;
school discipline. Is there an
age too young to be suspended?
President Obama faced one of the
toughest lines of questioning
since taking office in
an interview with Steve Kroft
on "60 Minutes" last night.
When asked about Hillary
Clinton's use of a private
e-mail server while serving as
secretary
of state, the president said the
controversy was politically
motivated.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: I don't think it
posed a national security
problem.
I think that it was a mistake
that she has acknowledged. As a
general proposition, when
we're in these offices, we have
to be more sensitive and stay as
far away from the line
as possible when it comes to how
we handle information, how we
handle our own personal
data.
I do think that the way it's
been ginned up is in part
because of politics. And I think
she'd be the first to
acknowledge that maybe she could
have handled the original
decision
better and the disclosures
more quickly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also this
weekend, a former staffer for
the special committee
investigating
the Benghazi consulate attack
spoke out on CNN, claiming the
Republican-led panel was
targeting Clinton, rather than
conducting an objective
investigation.
BRADLEY PODLISKA, Fired Benghazi
Committee Staffer: Hillary
Clinton has a lot of explaining
to do. We, however, did not need
to shift resources to
hyper-focus on Hillary Clinton.
We didn't need to de-emphasize
and in some cases drop the
investigation on different
agencies, different
organizations and different
individuals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and a
look ahead to the first
Democratic presidential debate
on
Tuesday. It's a perfect
time for Politics Monday.
I'm joined by Tamara Keith of
NPR and Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report.
Welcome to you both.
AMY WALTER, The Cook
Political Report: Thank you.
TAMARA KEITH, National
Public Radio: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A
lot to talk about.
So, the president, as we just
heard, he has weighed in now,
said Hillary Clinton made
a mistake, but he said she has
acknowledged it. And we just
heard this former staffer,
Tamara, for the Benghazi
Committee said that what they
were doing was politically
motivated,
it was too targeted on her.
Is this going to make a
difference, do you think, in
this issue? Is it going to go
away
as a result of this?
TAMARA KEITH: This is
absolutely not going away.
The Benghazi Committee is going
to have a hearing -- it has it
scheduled for about a
week from now, a little more
than a week from now, where
Hillary Clinton is set to
testify.
She will have more fuel to be
able to say, look, this a
partisan thing. But they're
going
to ask her tough questions and
she's going to sit there and
have to answer them for what
could be a very,
very long hearing.
And then the e-mails are going
to keep coming out in monthly
doses. So, just because she
had a couple of decent news
cycles doesn't mean that this
goes away. It is also very
muddy in people's
minds at this point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, even
with the McCarthy, the Kevin
McCarthy statement, politically
motivated, and this former
staffer, you're saying it
doesn't make any difference, or
does it?
AMY WALTER: Yes, I
agree with Tamara.
You still have the FBI
investigating. Was there
classified material on here that
she
willingly passed on? Was she
hacked by -- her e-mail server
hacked by a foreign government?
We still need answers to those
questions, plus the drip, drip,
drip of e-mails coming
out.
I think the one thing it
provides Hillary Clinton -- and
we may see this tomorrow at
the debate -- is an opportunity
to rally Democrats behind her,
where she is able to say, see,
Democrats, I know you have been
a little bit, maybe a little bit
questioning about me, maybe
not as enthusiastic as you
should be. But guess what? The
reason Republicans are doing
this is they don't want me to be
president. They don't want me to
talk about these issues.
They don't want us to bring up
-- they know they can't beat me,
so they bring this issue
up in order to try to defeat me.
TAMARA KEITH: And I will say
that when I interview Democrats
about this, and I did at least a
dozen, probably maybe 20
man-on-the-street interviews
just last week, all of the
Democrats
I talked to said it
doesn't bother me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Huh. So the
rallying affect that Amy is
talking about, you are saying
is already out there.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: They are convinced
this is part of the vast
right-wing conspiracy that
Hillary
Clinton coined.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the
Democratic debate, as you said,
Amy, is tomorrow night, first
time we're going to see
them all together.
And meantime, there are some new
polls out. And we can show you
the results of this. Going
in, it has Hillary Clinton up in
some of the primary states. This
is Nevada, where the
debate is going to be held,
coincidentally. You see Clinton
up 50 to 34 over Bernie Sanders.
In South Carolina, she's also up
49 to 24, with an even bigger
margin. Then, nationally
-- those are CNN polls. Then we
have a CBS poll nationally
showing her up 46 to 27.
Tamara, you know, looking at
this, does this give her such a
big advantage that, what,
she becomes a target
tomorrow night?
TAMARA KEITH: Did you think she
wasn't going to be the target
all along?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Exactly.
So what changes here?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, the polls
obviously don't change anything
here.
Those states are more diverse
than the states where Bernie
Sanders is now winning or right
on her heels, New Hampshire and
Iowa. But those are the two
first states and so they
have sort of an outsized
influence on things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy,
what do you see?
AMY WALTER: About the debate
tomorrow night, she definitely
is going to be the person that
everybody is focusing on.
And the question is how
aggressive are her opponents in
making that case? Is Bernie
Sanders,
as he said this weekend on "Meet
the Press," going to show the
consistency with which he's
stood by his convictions, a
not-so-veiled reference to the
fact that Hillary Clinton
has taken multiple positions on
the issues over the course of
her career, that she most
recently came out against the
Keystone pipeline, against the
trade promotion pact, Pacific
pact?
You know, is he going to be that
aggressive? Is Martin O'Malley
going to be that aggressive?
Or are they going to sit back a
little bit and try to make the
case for themselves, but
not make it about her?
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do they have
to do tomorrow night? I mean, do
they -- don't they -- somebody
like Martin O'Malley is barely
registering in these polls.
Tamara, what does he need
to do?
TAMARA KEITH: In many polls,
he's an asterisk or a hyphen. He
doesn't even have 1 percent.
And what he needs to do, just by
being on that stage, he will do
a lot of that. People
will figure out who Martin
O'Malley is. They will learn his
name. But he also needs to
be impressive. He needs to say
something that gets people
excited.
And what he has been saying and
it seems likely he will continue
to say is, hey, look, I'm
a new generation, wink, wink,
I'm younger than those other
people, and he also talks
a lot about his executive
experience. I would expect him
to do that again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there that
much difference on the issues,
Amy, among these candidates?
AMY WALTER: Not so much now that
Hillary has come out decisively
on two big issues, trade
and the Keystone pipeline.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Moving left.
AMY WALTER: Moving
left on those issues.
I don't think you are going to
see that much difference,
although you may see somebody
come up and talk about her vote
on Iraq, which, of course, now
she has said was a mistake.
I do think it's stylistic. And
the difference between this
debate and the Republican debate
is, the Republican debate -- the
Republican primary is truly wide
open. So there was an
opportunity for somebody like a
Marco Rubio, a Carly Fiorina to
rise up, because you have
Republicans truly searching
around for anybody, trying to
figure out who these people are.
On the Democratic side, she is
the front-runner. She has very
high approval ratings among
Democrats.
Democrats do not look like they
are looking for somebody else.
So, if you are Martin O'Malley,
if you are Bernie Sanders, you
have got to give them, them
meaning the voters, a reason
to look away from
Hillary Clinton.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
I can't get let the two of you
get away without asking about
what is going on in the House
of Representatives. They can't
seem to agree on who their
speaker is going to be, that
is, the Republican Caucus.
Tamara, what is your
reporting telling you?
TAMARA KEITH: I checked in with
a spokesman for Paul Ryan, who
is the chairman of the
House Ways and Means Committee,
of course, former vice
presidential nominee. He is the
one who it seems like everyone
wants. The spokesman said, check
my Twitter.
And on Twitter...
JUDY WOODRUFF:
That's a new answer.
TAMARA KEITH: Well, here you go.
And on Twitter, he said, before
you even ask, I have no updates,
and I don't expect any
updates for the whole week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy, when --
could this begin to have
longer-term effects on the
Republicans
or...
AMY WALTER: Absolutely.
The person actually who is most
in danger of this being a
problem is actually Mitch
McConnell, who is the majority
leader in the Senate, the
Republican leader of the Senate.
The House, despite all this
dysfunction, is likely to stay
in Republican hands. There
are just too many
Republican-controlled seats that
are too safe. The problem for
Republicans
is in the Senate, where they
have at least seven seats in
states that Barack Obama
carried.
These are very marginal states,
where the Republican incumbent
is trying desperately
to not look too partisan.
If we see Washington truly melt
down, Republicans get the blame,
it's those senators who are
going to take a lot of the
suffering, not the House folks.
And that is the danger, I
think, really for Republicans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fascinating,
because so many people are
focused right now just on the
House.
AMY WALTER: Right.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, we thank you both,
Politics Monday.
TAMARA KEITH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Appreciate it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Washington Post
reporter Jason Rezaian is
spending his 447th night in a
jail
in Iran tonight. News that an
Iranian court convicted the
journalist came yesterday, but
little else is known about
the ruling or his fate.
Jeffrey Brown has more.
JEFFREY BROWN: Iran's judiciary
announced that an appeal could
be filed, but gave no
specifics on the details of the
ruling. Rezaian was tried on
espionage and other charges.
We reached out to Iran's
representative at the United
Nations to join us. He didn't
accept
our invitation.
For its part, The Washington
Post is calling the ruling --
quote -- "an outrageous
injustice."
And joining me now is the
newspaper's foreign editor,
Douglas Jehl.
Doug Jehl, thanks
for joining us.
Do we even know at this point
what Jason Rezaian has been
convicted of or what sentence he
might face?
DOUGLAS JEHL, Foreign Editor,
The Washington Post: We know
none of that.
We know only that he has been
convicted, but on what charges,
what penalty, and indeed,
what basis Iran claims to offer
for convicting Jason of these
crimes, it has never been
stated.
JEFFREY BROWN: And is there any
way of knowing whether he
himself has -- whether he knows
any of this or knows
the situation?
DOUGLAS JEHL: Well, his mother,
his wife and his attorney went
to the court today in Tehran,
to the Revolutionary Court, to
seek clarity. And, cruelly, they
were turned away. They
were told that the translator
wasn't available, that they
could be given no further
information
at this time.
Our presumption is that
Jason doesn't know.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, even though
this is playing out in the
court, your supposition all
along
has been that this is really,
really playing out in the
political sphere, correct?
Explain
what you think is going on.
DOUGLAS JEHL: I
think that's right.
I think this has played out
very, very slowly in the Iranian
courts for 15 months now, but
it's clear that ultimately the
decision-makers are going to be
Iran's senior leadership.
It's the senior leaders who have
the power to overturn a decision
in court. They have
the power to pardon
someone like Jason.
They have the power to bring him
home. And in recent weeks, we
have seen very strong
signals from Iran's president,
Rouhani, and others of what they
want. They have made clear
they're willing to move toward
freeing Jason and other
Americans if the United States
is
willing to free Iranians held
in American prisons in return.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so what
has kept that from happening?
DOUGLAS JEHL: The United States
hasn't really responded to those
overtures from Iran, at
least not in public. We don't
know if there has been further
discussion behind closed
doors.
One thing that has prevented it
from happening, though, is that,
until now, the matter has
remained in the courts. If there
is any glimmer of hope from
today's announcement, as
outrageous
and cruel as it was, it may be
that this sham of a judicial
process is nearing its end and
that the political steps
are about to begin.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about
tensions in Iran, in which
hard-liners, conservatives are
perhaps
sending a message to Rouhani and
so-called moderates to -- in the
context, of course,
of the recent nuclear
deal and other things?
DOUGLAS JEHL: I think it is
clear that Jason Rezaian, an
innocent journalist, has been
caught up in a much, much
larger struggle inside Iran.
And I think it's also clear that
President Rouhani has limited
authority for what happens
inside Iran. I think he has made
clear he would like to have seen
Jason released a long
time ago. The fact that that
hasn't happened suggests that it
is other forces, the security
services in particular, who
have at least equal power here.
JEFFREY BROWN: You at this point
do not know anything about a
potential prisoner swap?
DOUGLAS JEHL: We
do not. I do not.
All I know is that -- is what we
have heard publicly from Iranian
officials for weeks
now, referring to as many as 19
Iranians held in American jails,
and suggesting that, while
they say they don't like the
word exchange, that there could
be a progress toward the
release of Americans if there is
progress toward the release of
Iranians held here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Douglas Jehl of
The Washington Post, thank you
so much.
DOUGLAS JEHL: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Nobel Prize-winning economist
Angus Deaton; some schools under
fire for suspending very young
students; and an NBA player
returns to his native Congo
to help provide opportunities
to former child soldiers.
But first, we take a closer look
at what's driving many Syrian
refugees to risk their
lives by attempting the
journey to Europe.
Syria's neighbor, Jordan, has
taken in more than 600,000
refugees over the past four
years,
and has quite literally been
buckling under the strain on its
scarce resources and a massive
drop in international aid. The
refugees themselves are the
hardest-hit there.
And, tonight, special
correspondent Jane Arraf
introduces us to a few of them
who are willing
to risk everything to leave.
JANE ARRAF: Every evening, Ali
goes out with his daughters and
his son, Hassan. It's not
for the fresh air. It's illegal
for most Syrian refugees to work
in Jordan. In the daytime,
he tries to find odd jobs
without getting arrested. To
help put food on the table, at
night, he looks for soda cans to
sell and broken appliances to
repair.
ALI, Syrian Refugee (through
translator): Sometimes, I take
the girls with me and walk
for three or four miles. At the
end of the month, people get
their salaries and throw
a lot of things away. But when I
walk for longer distances, I
just take Hassan, and
I carry two or three
bags with me.
JANE ARRAF: It's exhausting, but
he says he would rather do
honest work than beg for money.
Hassan is 13. He was in a car
accident in Syria when he was a
baby. He and five sisters
and a brother came to Jordan
with their parents three years
ago. Two more children were born
here, a blessing, Ali says.
He says when they first came
from Aleppo, things were fine.
They brought almost $20,000
in savings. And organizations
were eager to help. But now the
savings are gone. And aid
has been cut to almost nothing.
With winter coming, it's become
almost impossible here.
But Ali has a plan.
ALI (through translator): My
wife's family is in Turkey. Her
relatives went to Germany.
Some of them arrived. Some of
them didn't. We spoke to some
people, and, God willing,
by the end of the month, we will
be there. We will leave from
here to Turkey with our
passports and then we will leave
Turkey for Greece and then
Austria and then Germany.
JANE ARRAF: Ali's nephew drowned
this year trying to reach
Europe. He says the children
are all terrified of dying on
the crossing. But he plans to
get a backpack and carry the
youngest children on his back.
His wife will carry Hassan.
Ali's family is among the 80
percent of Syrian refugees
trying to survive outside the
camps
in Jordan. It's a small country
with high unemployment and few
resources sandwiched
between Syria, Iraq, Israel, the
Palestinian territories, and
Saudi Arabia.
Politicians like Mustafa
Hamarneh say it would make sense
to allow Syrians to work legally
in Jordan, but that's
unlikely to happen.
MUSTAFA HAMARNEH, Member of
Jordanian Parliament: You have
to keep in mind that over 20
percent
of the -- of Jordan's population
today is -- consists of Syrian
refugees. On top of
that, you have 400,000
Egyptians. On top of that, you
have about 300,000 Iraqis, and
you
have 50,000 Yemenis.
And now Interior tells us that
there are about 100,000 Libyans.
So, how do you deal with
all this and how do you deal
with the tremendous unrest
around us?
JANE ARRAF: There's an intense
sympathy here for the refugees,
but as the war goes on,
a growing frustration.
MUSTAFA HAMARNEH: Now, you will
not see in Jordan what you see
in Europe, massive
demonstrations
against the refugees. You see
some voices here, that these are
our skinheads who make
noise here and there, but there
will not be any mass -- negative
mass movement opposing
either the Syrians
or the Iraqis.
Once the dust settles down at
the end of the day these are
Arabs and people see them as
fellow Arabs.
JANE ARRAF: But particularly in
the cities, a lot of Jordanian
citizens feel they are
competing with Syrian refugees
for basic resources. This is one
of Jordan's biggest supermarket
chains. It's one of 90
supermarkets where Syrian
refugees can access the aid
provided
by the World Food Program.
With the latest cuts, it's full
of food that refugees now can
only dream of being able
to afford. Only the poorest of
Syrian refugees are stilling
getting help buying food. So,
with cards like these from the
World Food Program, each of them
gets $14 a month. That
doesn't go very far. For
instance, this bottle of oil
costs $4.
Just a bag of sugar would cost
almost half a refugee's monthly
allowance. The cuts in
aid have been so deep that, on
this day, all of these shoppers
are Jordanian. Jordanian
businesspeople say rents have
risen so much since the Syrians
arrived that even Jordanians
have less money
to spend on food.
The World Food Program cut aid
in half to a quarter-million
Syrians here. More than
100,000 people, including
children, were dropped entirely.
Refugees are increasingly making
the dangerous journey to Europe
because they're having trouble
surviving in neighboring
countries.
JONATHAN CAMPBELL, World Food
Program: The cuts in assistance
is one of the driving factors.
I don't think we are the only
organization, but we were
described the other day as the
straw that broke the camel's
back, and I think that's
probably true.
JANE ARRAF: After four years of
fighting in Syria, half the
country's population is
displaced.
And Jordan's biggest camp,
Zaatari, is looking more
permanent. The tents are still
here,
but now they are attached to
trailers provided for each
family. Some refugees have
started
growing their old food,
like corn and eggplant.
The population at Zaatari camp
has been capped at 80,000
people, and the cuts in aid here
are far less severe. It's
sweltering in the summer and
cold in the winter, but no one
is in danger of starving. From
this camp, though, more than 100
refugees a day are actually
leaving back to Syria. They're
not allowed to return to Jordan.
Relatives load the bus with
blankets and clothing they will
need to survive in devastated
communities.
Um Mohammad is trying to take
one last photo of her grandson
before a policeman stops her.
Many of those on the bus don't
want it known they're going
back.
Her son was arrested for working
illegally and has already gone
back to Syria.
UM MOHAMMAD, Syrian Refugee
(through translator): He called
his wife and said, we are going
to Turkey. Come and join me. In
Turkey, life is much better than
here. We are allowed to
work.
JANE ARRAF: Jordan has
essentially closed its border
with Syria. There are now more
Syrian refugees leaving Jordan
than arriving. Most of the
refugees going back to Syria
won't
talk on camera. Some say they're
being sent back by the Jordanian
government after being
caught working illegally.
Some are going back to fight.
But most of them say, with the
cuts in aid, they just can't
survive in Jordan anymore.
The Jordanian government says it
has in the past deported a small
number of refugees back
to Syria for serious security
violations. But it says all of
those going back now are
returning voluntarily.
Ali isn't thinking of going back
to Syria. He's got his sights
set on Sweden. He can
fix almost anything. Almost
everything in their home,
including the television, was
either thrown away or bought
cheaply and repaired. He says he
doesn't want any handouts in
Europe.
He will clean bathrooms
if he has to.
He knows there's a chance they
could die trying to get there.
But here, he says, is the
certainty
of another difficult winter.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jane Arraf in Amman, Jordan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, the winner
of the Nobel Prize in Economics.
Scottish-born Angus Deaton was
recognized earlier today for his
analyses about spending,
poverty and welfare. His work is
based on economic models with a
focus on individuals
and on household surveys that
reveal how different social
groups make economic decisions,
particularly
in poorer countries.
I spoke to him a short while ago
at Princeton where he is a
professor at the Woodrow Wilson
School.
Professor Deaton, thank you
very much. And congratulations.
ANGUS DEATON, Nobel Prize in
Economics Winner: Thank you.
It's a pleasure to talk to you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you thought it
might have been a prank call?
ANGUS DEATON: Well, I didn't
think it was a prank call until
they said it's not a prank
call.
(LAUGHTER)
ANGUS DEATON: I hadn't really
thought of it until that moment.
But then I thought, maybe
it was a prank call.
But I recognized two of the
people on the committee, so I'm
sure that was a joke. And
it certainly made us all smile,
even early in the morning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You were honored
for your measurement of basic
economic indicators. For people
who
don't know economics, explain
why measuring things matters.
ANGUS DEATON: Well, I mean, I
think we tend to take a lot of
things for granted.
I mean, you know, the very word
data means given. And yet most
of the numbers we have
are not given. They're produced
by statistical offices, many of
whom are under terrible budget
pressure and threats from
politicians who don't understand
how important the numbers
are.
And, also, we can't -- if we
don't know what sort of progress
we're making and how we're
doing, we don't really know
where we are. And, you know, a
lot of people think the world
is getting to be a worse place.
A lot are thinking it is getting
to be a better place.
We have got to be able to
resolve these questions and know
what is happening.
We talk about inequality a lot.
Well, we have got to measure it
and we have got to be able
to say whether those people who
say it is getting worse are
right or those people who
say nothing is
happening are right.
And so measurement is a very,
very important part of this, and
careful measurement is something
that's not always
in great supply.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, give us an
example of how you improved one
kind of measurement.
ANGUS DEATON: Well, for
instance, one of the things that
we're interested in is whether
-- how much money people have
and how much stuff they can buy
given the amount of money
they actually have.
So, one of the things to do that
is, you need to know what prices
are like where they are.
So you have to measure very
carefully the prices of all the
goods they buy. So, you
know, if your rent goes up, even
if you have the same income, you
are poorer. And so that's
been a real challenge,
especially in global poverty,
but also in measuring individual
country poverty.
So I have done a lot of work on
trying to measure prices in
India, for instance, and
trying to match up those prices
to individual people and to find
out how well those people
are doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How did a
professor at Princeton
University, which most people
consider to
be a pretty elite place, get so
interested in inequality and in
poverty and worry -- and
be worried about it?
ANGUS DEATON: Well, maybe --
someone asked me this today, and
I think it's true -- that
I grew up pretty poor.
I have had experience -- you
know, I probably belonged to the
1 percent nowadays. I have
an experience at both ends of
the distribution. And that's
taught me a lot. And I think, if
you have never really been poor,
it's hard to understand how --
what most of the people
in the world live through and
live like, and how lucky those
of us are who don't have to
live these really,
really difficult lives.
Luck is an incredibly important
thing. A lot of people who have
done very well think it
was entirely by their own
efforts. Well, maybe it was.
But, for most of us, we got to
where
we got by a lot of luck.
So, I have always been very
conscience of that. And
Princeton has a public policy
school
and it really cares about these
issues. So, I don't think there
is any contradiction there.
You don't want to think of
Princeton as just a bunch of
elite kids doing whatever elite
kids do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You -- in your
book that you wrote -- I guess
it came out two years ago
-- "Great Escape: Health,
Wealth, and the Origins of
Inequality."
ANGUS DEATON: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You did show how
life on this planet Earth has
just gotten a whole lot better
for many, many people, better
than it was a century ago,
half-a-century ago.
And yet you do emphasize
inequality and why that is a
problem, and why it's something
people need to keep focused on.
ANGUS DEATON: That's
exactly right.
And one of the things that has
delighted me, and as I have
thought about inequality and
worried about inequality all my
working life -- but it's not
something that has been very
much talked about. On the left,
people denounced inequality. On
the right, people denounced
people who worried
about inequality.
And there's been very little
serious discussion until
recently. And I think inequality
has
its good sides. It's part of the
reward for effort and part of
the reward for new innovations
and all the things that are
propelling our lives forward.
But it also can be a terrible
threat if the people who get
very rich try to deprive the
rest of us of things that are
important to us, like democracy,
like public schools, like
public health systems, and so
on. So I think inequality is a
very two-edged sword. I think
it's very important that we have
an enormous public debate about
it, and if this prize
helps towards having that
debate, I would be absolutely
delighted.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Professor Angus
Deaton, the winner of the Nobel
Prize in Economics, we
congratulate you. And thanks.
ANGUS DEATON: Thank you very
much, indeed. It's been a real
pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With more than
three million students suspended
from public schools each
year, President Obama and the
federal Department of Education
want schools to find
alternatives
to sending kids home.
Studies show that students who
are suspended are more likely to
be held back a grade, to
drop out of school, or end up in
trouble with the law. Most
suspended students are in high
school or, less
often, middle school.
But in some schools, children as
young as 5 or 6 are being
disciplined this way.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
for education John Merrow looks
at high-profile charter
schools network
in New York City.
JOHN MERROW: If you have ever
been sent home from school, what
they call suspended, if
that ever happened to you, raise
your hand. No hands at all.
Do you use out-of-school
suspension for kindergartners
and first graders?
MARIE CHAUVET-MONCHIK,
Principal, PS-138 Brooklyn: No,
I can't. I can't see it. I don't
see the
benefit of it.
When you send a child home, the
child is missing instruction.
So, I'm actually robbing the
child of an education
if I suspend the child.
JOHN MERROW: This is PS-138, a
public school in Brooklyn, New
York. It reports suspensions
in kindergarten and first grade.
But at the public charter school
in the same building,
things are different.
WOMAN: So, here at Success
Academy, we do have a very
structured environment, and we
do have very high academic an
behavioral expectations for our
scholars. And we do suspend
children.
JOHN MERROW: Quite a few. Last
year, principal Monica Komery
issued 44 out-of-school
suspensions
to her 203 kindergartners and
first graders. Her school is
part of Success Academies, the
largest charter network in New
York City. Like all charter
schools, they're publicly
funded, but privately run.
The network's founder and CEO,
Eva Moskowitz, believes behavior
sets the stage for learning.
EVA MOSKOWITZ, Founder and CEO,
Success Academy Charter Schools:
If you get it right in the
early years, you actually have
to suspend far less when the
kids are older, because
they understand what
is expected of them.
JOHN MERROW: Moskowitz opened
her first Success Academy in
2006. Since then, the network
has
grown to 34 schools, nearly all
of them elementary. They
emphasize science and the arts
and are
wildly popular among parents,
with 10 applicants for every
seat.
WOMAN: I was ecstatic when we
got into Success Academy. Grade
school, I tell all my friends
and family, if you can, do it.
JOHN MERROW: And what else
do they find appealing?
WOMAN: For us, the learning, to
me, and the discipline as well.
WOMAN: We do have a
zero-tolerance policy around
certain behaviors. But I don't
just
suspend children as the first
course of action. It's
well-thought-out. It's a
process, and
there are systems in place.
JOHN MERROW: The code of conduct
runs six pages and identifies 65
infractions, from
bullying and gambling to
littering and failing to be in a
ready-to-succeed position.
Former Success Academy student
Jamir Geidi told me about some
of the other rules.
JAMIR GEIDI, Former Success
Academy Student: I would always
have to keep my shirt tucked
in. And let's say I wasn't
wearing black shoes, and I was
wearing red shoes. Then that
would
be an infraction.
JOHN MERROW: These infractions,
if repeated, could trigger an
out-of-school suspension,
at the discretion of the
principal. By contrast,
principals at traditional public
schools have
to have district approval before
suspending any
K-through-third-grade student.
Suspension rates at Success
Academies are almost three times
higher than the city's
K-12 public schools, even though
70 percent of Success Academies
are elementary schools.
What does a 5-year-old do that
warrants an out-of-school
suspension of one day or
multiple
days?
EVA MOSKOWITZ: Well, using
sexually explicit language. It's
very upsetting.
JOHN MERROW: First time?
EVA MOSKOWITZ: First time, yes.
JOHN MERROW: But your code of
conduct calls for out-of-school
suspension for a lot of
other things, not just sexually
-- I mean, for example, calling
out the right answer
twice without being called on.
EVA MOSKOWITZ: That's not...
JOHN MERROW: The first time you
do it is at level one
infraction. The second time is a
level two. And one consequence
of level two is out-of-school
suspension. Or getting out
of your seat without
permission...
EVA MOSKOWITZ: Yes.
JOHN MERROW: ... is a level two,
which could be out-of-school, or
even having...
EVA MOSKOWITZ: But it --
it could be, but it's not.
JOHN MERROW: I'm sorry?
EVA MOSKOWITZ: We haven't.
JOHN MERROW: It's there, but you
don't -- you haven't done it?
EVA MOSKOWITZ: I mean, that's
not the context. A disciplinary
code is written to give maximum
freedom. And we believe it's
preparing children for life.
JOHN MERROW: Success Academies
are obviously doing something
right. Last year, 93 percent
of Success Academy students
passed the state's math test,
compared to just 35 percent in
the city's traditional
public schools.
Could out-of-school suspensions
be a factor in the network's
academic success? Eva
Moskowitz's
critics think so. They accuse
her of suspending very young
children over and over to
persuade
parents to change schools before
state testing begins in third
grade. Could that be true?
We do know that some Success
Academy students are suspended
over and over.
The 44 suspensions at this
school were issued to just 11
kindergartners and first
graders.
One child was suspended 12
times. Eventually, the family
withdrew the child. At another
Success Academy, 101 suspensions
went to just 32 students.
JAMIR GEIDI: I was suspended so
many times, it was just like --
it was just -- it was
like, why do I even come here
every day if I just know that
I'm going to get suspended?
JOHN MERROW: Jamir's mother told
us he was suspended three or
four times his first year
for losing his temper. She said
she was also called two or three
times a week to pick him
up early.
Other parents told us their
young children were sent home
multiple times for infractions
like not paying attention or for
getting out of their seats to
look at the bulletin board.
Why do we hear so many stories,
and why do we keep meeting these
parents who say, early
on, we were counseled out; our
kid was, like, sent home because
he would get up and go look
at the bulletin
board, a 5-year-old?
EVA MOSKOWITZ: First of all,
anecdotes don't make for
statistical trends.
But, in my experience, you know,
parents often have a different
interpretation of what happened.
I often have parents say to me,
my child never punched the
teacher. I say, well, but you
weren't there.
JOHN MERROW: Jamir's mother
withdrew him from Success
Academy after two-and-a-half
years.
Now 10, he just began his third
year at a public school that
approaches discipline
differently.
FATIMA GEIDI, Mother: Yes, Jamir
has had meltdowns. Yes, he has
anxiety. Yes, he's cried. Yes,
he's had outbursts. But guess
what? The school says, fine, you
need a break. You're going
to go help one of the
secretaries in the office. You
are going to shred paper. You
are going
to go water the plants. You are
going to do something helpful.
When you are ready, you
will come back. And guess what?
He is getting his education.
JOHN MERROW: Do you ever use
out-of-school suspension as a
way to persuade parents that...
EVA MOSKOWITZ: No. No. We don't
suspend in order to boost our
academics. Like, that's
just crazy talk.
JOHN MERROW: But our sources,
including several public school
principals, quite a few former
Success Academy parents, and one
person inside her organization,
charge that is exactly what
she does, repeatedly suspend
certain kids to push them out.
However, none of these critics
were willing to publicly
confront Moskowitz.
EVA MOSKOWITZ: Well, the numbers
just don't support that, John. I
mean, what you get is
what you see, which is
suspending kids doesn't lead to
high attrition rate. That is
what
the data shows.
JOHN MERROW: In fact, the
attrition rate is at least twice
that of another major charter
network, KIPP. A Success Academy
representative told thaws for
every 100 new students, at
least 10 leave before the year's
out, most of them in the first
few months. They are
then replaced by students
chosen from the waiting list.
In the end, how charter schools
conduct their business is
basically their own business.
New York could demand detailed
information about out-of-school
suspensions, but they
allow all charter schools, not
just Eva Moskowitz's Success
Academies, to set their own
rules.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Merrow, reporting from New York
City.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight, we begin
a three-part series entitled
Congo's Hope.
The Democratic Republic of Congo
is one of the world's poorest
countries as a result
of colonialism, misrule and,
most recently, war, and this
despite being endowed with
precious
natural resources.
Our series marks the debut of
"NewsHour"'s contributing editor
Soledad O'Brien.
She begins the series in Goma, a
city on the shores of Lake Kivu,
and the place where Congolese
NBA player Bismack Biyombo
returned this summer.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Bismack Biyombo
comes ashore on the banks of
Lake Kivu like a jolly lean
giant, young, handsome, 6'9''.
He is 22 years old, a center in
the NBA who towers above
this village of coffee growers.
And that is not where the
contrast ends. Just hours
earlier, Biyombo signed a
two-year $6
million contract to play
basketball for the Toronto
Raptors.
BISMACK BIYOMBO, Toronto
Raptors: Done. I'm a Raptor.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Signing right
here in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, one of the poorest
countries in the world.
BISMACK BIYOMBO: I grew up here.
I dreamed one day about being in
the NBA. And the process
that I have been through to be
able to make it, and then come
back here and sign it from
here is just -- it's that
feeling that I can't explain.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Why do
you come back to Congo?
BISMACK BIYOMBO: I love the
people. I love the potential of
this place. And I think we
have a bright future.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Biyombo is of
the Congo, perhaps even a
metaphor for what it might
be. He was born in Lubumbashi on
the southeast end of the
country.
What was your childhood
like in Lubumbashi?
BISMACK BIYOMBO: Like, we
were eating once a day.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: One meal a day?
BISMACK BIYOMBO: One meal a day,
because you cannot afford. But
I'm actually glad of those
things happen to me.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Really? Why?
BISMACK BIYOMBO: Because it
teach me. That's what help me to
come back here and help.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Like Congo, he
was rich with potential, but low
on prospects. He was discovered
by a Portuguese coach and played
in Spain before being drafted to
the NBA.
BISMACK BIYOMBO: Every time I
think about the way I got to the
NBA, it is a motivation
to myself, and I'm
thankful for it.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Biyombo is
traveling with the Eastern Congo
Initiative, ECI, the brainchild
of actor Ben Affleck, which
focuses in the area around Goma,
a place scarred by volcanoes,
overrun by refugees, and
repeatedly, for the last two
decades, at war over its rich
minerals.
Congo is fighting to do what
Biyombo did: pick itself up off
the floor.
BISMACK BIYOMBO: It's good to
see people trying to help us put
it together. But more than
anything, it's that I
believe in human resources.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: ECI showed
Biyombo an example of those
resources in these hills.
Here, a sleeping coffee industry
is waking up, as a string of aid
organizations are building
infrastructure and training
workers. The newest customer for
the arabica coffee is Starbucks.
Baraka Kasali manages the
initiative that works with 4,000
farmers.
There has been coffee in this
community for 30 years. I mean,
the farmer we met said his
grandfather is the one who
brought the coffee plants and
planted them 30 years ago.
BARAKA KASALI, Eastern Congo
Initiative: They haven't
received the value for that
coffee.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Why not?
BARAKA KASALI: Because they
haven't had access to the
markets. So we partner with
them. We
were able to be a catalyst to
bring in folks, like USAID and
the Howard Buffett Foundation,
and say, hey, here's an
opportunity to invest in people.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The work has
transformed the life of this
woman and her children. This
is her old home, and this one
the new, bought and built with
coffee money.
The program is one of several
that NGOs are promoting, with
the goal of creating a
sustainable
society for the Congolese, one
with economic development at the
forefront, rather than
war.
DARIO MERLO, Executive Director,
Eastern Congo Initiative: Peace
and stability will one day
be a reality in this country.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Dario Merlo
is executive director of ECI.
Is it realistic to think that a
country that literally for the
last 20 years has been in
conflict can turn it around?
DARIO MERLO: You need to invest
in people. People are ready to
do something for their
country.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The DRC, the
largest country in sub-Saharan
Africa, is a compilation of
sad statistics. The life
expectancy is in the 50s. The
infant mortality rate is among
the highest in the world. Hunger
and starvation are commonplace.
DARIO MERLO: This is a country
with extraordinary people, and
when you add it to the potential
in minerals, in forest, clean
water, you know, such a
resilience from nature, from
people,
from everything.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: That means that
successful Congolese like
Biyombo must do more than just
encourage business.
What does hope come in the form
of? Is that, hey, you just got a
big contract; you are
going to write some seriously
big checks? Is it, you're going
to come and visit? What
is -- describe specifically
what hope looks like.
BISMACK BIYOMBO: Well, to me is
to be able to establish
companies that will create jobs,
give people jobs, establish
schools, that kids will be able
to go and get an education,
and then establish farms where
people actually can eat,
because, if you don't eat, you
cannot
work.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: To fill those
jobs, Congo needs a well-trained
work force. Here, young
people learn new skills, like
carpentry, auto repair, and
plumbing. This young woman told
Biyombo she wants
to be a mechanic.
BISMACK BIYOMBO: What she said
to me was touching, because she
said that, I wanted to do
mechanic,
because it's not just a man's
job, and I don't want people to
think this is just a man's
job.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: For Biyombo,
this is a very different Congo
than the one he left. Goma,
where the program runs, was in
the crossfire of a civil war
just two years ago. The
population
was on the run from violence.
Now people are dropping their
arms and picking up tools.
Jobs aren't all this community
needs to prosper. They need to
get along. Biyombo also came
here to run a basketball clinic.
DARIO MERLO: For all of us, he
is this national hero. Every
professional athlete must show
some discipline, hard work, and
all these value, you want him to
actually share that
with the kids, especially in
post-conflict area, because kids
who play together, when
they grow up, you realize that,
actually, difference and
diversity is a richness, that
it's not something you
should be afraid of.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: For Biyombo,
this is fun in a country where
there has been too little,
a place where he no longer wants
to see the ugliness, but the
beauty, like the vast rich
farmland which could grow an
economy, or the rare gorillas
that could attract new tourism.
The story of Congo, to him, is
all of this, and the potential
of a people who have resilience
at their core.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Soledad O'Brien in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Our series
Congo's Hope continues tomorrow.
Soledad profiles a Congolese
filmmaker
who is bringing movies and
moviemaking to his country.
Finally tonight, we want to note
the passing of longtime Secret
Service agent Jerry Parr.
He was with Ronald Reagan at the
Washington Hilton Hotel in 1981
when the president was
shot.
A few years ago, the "NewsHour"
returned to that hotel, and Parr
explained what happened
that day, just moments after the
shots rang out and he
immediately shoved the president
into his waiting limousine:
JERRY PARR, Former Secret
Service Agent: I ran my hands up
under his coat, his hair,
everything, and found no blood.
So that's when I radioed back,
Rawhide is OK.
But in Dupont Circle, or very
close to it, he started frothing
-- frothing bright red
blood, and he was dripping it on
my coat, so I said, "I am taking
you to the hospital."
He either said OK or he nodded
to me. And I was very, very
worried.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was also there
that day. Jerry Parr is a
remarkable man.
You can hear the rest of his
description of the day and his
career in the Secret Service
at our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And our condolences
to his family.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, I sit down with Bob
Woodward and the source of his
new book, Nixon White House
aide Alexander Butterfield, who
has kept secrets until now.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.